cracks have begun to show in Israel's
war cabinet over the future of the Gaza
Strip Former Defense Minister Benny Gans
is threatening to resign from the
cabinet unless the government comes up
with a concrete plan for a post-war Gaza
he had joined ASA show of unity after
Hamas launched the October 7th terrorist
attack Now Guns has set a three-week
deadline ramping up the pressure on
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
meanwhile fighting between Israel and
Hamas is intensifying Northern Gaza is
seeing some of the fiercest battles of
the war so far months after Israel
declared the end of operations in the
area while in the South hundreds of
thousands flee fighting in Rafa many of
them not for the first
time heavy clashes Rock the southern
gazen city of Rafa as Israel pushes
ahead with its assault against
Hamas the you know United Nations says
800,000 people more than a third of
gaza's population have been displaced
from the area despite having nowhere to
go the northern part of the strip is
also Under Fire in jabalia Israeli tanks
roll through the devastated
streets the Army says it's conducting
quote precise operations against
terrorists and infrastructure
inside Israel thousands joined the
weekly anti-government protests in Tel
Aviv they want the Prime Minister
Benyamin Netanyahu to resign and new
elections to be
called this uh government is taking our
country to places that uh I don't I
don't want to see my country go to I see
corruption I see lack of Hope I see lack
of
vision u i see mediocracy and even below
that and we won't
change meanwhile in Jerusalem new cracks
are emerging in netanyahu's
Coalition Centrist Benny Gant seen by
some as a moderating voice in an
otherwise Ultra conservative government
gave the rest of the cabinet an ultimate
him while Israeli soldiers are
displaying incredible bravery on the
front some of the people who sent them
to battle are acting with
cowardice the war cabinet must write
down and ratify an action plan that will
lead to the realization of six strategic
objectives of national importance by the
8th of
June if Benjamin Netanyahu chooses to
follow the zots and lead the nation into
an abyss I will resign from the
government
if Gant does resign it would not force
an election the Coalition still has a
majority but there are fears a moderate
voice would be lost at a time when it's
needed the
most so what effect will this renewed
heavy fighting have on the current
Israeli government strategy and policy
our Middle East analyst shanni rosanes
is here to talk about it good to see you
shannie um there has been a rather
dramatic statement by War cabinet
minister Benny guns what's he had to say
yes well um he joined the the government
um shortly after October 7th to
strengthen the government as an
emergency Unity government he is a
former General in the Israeli Army he's
considered to be a Centrist politician
and what he's saying tonight to
Netanyahu is basically he's setting an
ultimatum he's saying you uh the country
has been hijacked by the most extreme
parts of the right uh Coalition we need
to do a complete re rehal of our
strategy uh he's demanding several uh
things but the two most important ones
are are um demilitarizing Gaza uh in in
in the Civil way sort of like making
sure that the Israel military can only
operate when needed but that the daily
conduct of what's happening in Gaza
whoever takes care of Gaza and the gazan
population need would not be Israel but
rather a joint uh Alliance that is
headed and led by the Americans and he
also talks about Israel publicly
announcing and making active steps in
order to get into this um normalization
pact with um Saudi Arabia something the
Americans have been promoting for the
last months that will bring you know
American Saudi um Alliance together with
Israel and along with that also a lot of
many other moderate Sunni countries in
hopes to sort of reshape the balance of
power in the Middle East against Iran um
so these are some of his ultimatums
tonight and we are seeing basically in
this statement that all that we've been
hearing quietly whispered by Anonymous
sources in the last months is actually
out in the open a very open Rift a very
open um uh disagreement between the most
leading uh figures in the Israeli
government these days okay so there's a
lot packed in there that the gauntlet
has been laid down an ultimatum as you
say what then has Benjamin Netanyahu had
to say in response well he immediately
pushes it back he says well you know
ultimatum should not be set to me but
rather to Hamas and and and gans's words
will bring the feat to Israel his
attitude will not help us win um and and
Gans is trying to push back against that
we see a lot of this back and forth and
interestingly enough you would wonder
well Netanyahu is a prime minister he
could just you know if he wanted he
could fire Benny gun right now why is he
not doing it or why is Benny Gans not
actively saying immediately I'm
withdrawing from the government and so
what we're seeing here this political
dance for both sides are trying to put
the blame on the other because there's
an understanding that the minute that
Benny Gans and his party are out of the
Coalition nanyu still technically has
the numbers but he doesn't have the
public uh legitimacy and that might be
the the first brick uh in the domino
effect of of mass uh um protests in
Israel that might actually shake up
nany's uh political stability for the
first time in real uh in real
circumstances possible for him uh first
time since October that's worth asking
the obvious question where does this
leave the war cabinet where does this
leave the government right now it's a
very good question there's no doubt that
when it comes to uh handling the war and
making decisions you think of the
families of the hostages they look at
this and they're completely in despair
because they don't feel like anybody has
their interest in his you know top of
his agenda and of course that's not a
good position for Israel to be and I'm
sure it's very satisfying for Hamas to
see this we will see Jack Sullivan the
American national security um adviser
coming to Israel tomorrow from uh Riad
from Saudi Arabia still trying to make
maybe uh something out of this mess and
and try to get Israel to move into some
sort of a uh strategic U you know
Horizon uh it's a task that the
Americans have been trying to get n to
agree on for couple of months already
maybe now with this public um you know
uh outing of uh Minister Gans something
will change up in Israel the leadership
really interesting moment our Middle
East analyst Shan ranes thanks so much
you're
welcome we can now speak with Ahmed bam
with the Norwegian Refugee Council
that's an NGO carrying out humanitarian
work in gasa he joins us from Aman good
to have you with us so Ahmed as we just
saw in that report there are different
visions of a future for Gaza that are
now causing deep Rifts inside the
Israeli government how if at all do you
think this could change the situation on
the
ground uh I mean judging by what is
happening not very much it seems that
Israel is pressing ahead with its uh
ground operations there are you know
obviously reports of of troops massing
around that area uh at the same time
like you've just reported there's uh of
course intense escalation in in the
Northern parts so our team's on the
ground the Norwegian Refugee Council has
been pushed all the way to the west of
rafah and that's a bad sign a sign that
you know things are getting worse and
worse over you know the hours not really
days or weeks and particularly with the
numbers now 700,000 people we are
hearing have been displaced over the
last 10 days so things don't look
anything but Grim on the ground
and people you know have been left you
know to battle really battle for their
survival but uh hearing that uh a
heavyweight in the cabinet Benny guns
giving uh Benjamin Netanyahu and his
government basically an ultimatum to
come up with a solution for a postwar
Gaza do you think this could weaken or
strengthen Israel in this current
situation also fight
both in the North and the South of
Gaza I mean of course I mean we've been
we've been hearing you know without
getting into too much Politics as a as a
representative of a humanitarian
organization we see things from a
humanitarian point of view and and I can
tell you that the politics that has been
played out in recent weeks and months I
mean of course their disagreement within
the Israeli cabinet at the same time the
the dis agreement with Israel's allies
really led by the United States have
continued while the the operations on
the ground have not stopped so there is
kind of you know um there's a kind of di
diplomacy that is being played in the in
the background and at the same time
there Agreements are being played in the
in in the background we don't see much
impact of that on on the ground as in
you know the impact that we want to see
the positive change that we want to see
which is uh you know a ceasefire if
anything what is happening in the
political corridors is only you know
negatively reflecting on the situation
on the ground which means that probably
we are never you know uh close to a
ceasefire agreement with you know given
these you know disagreements in on the
Israeli side so we hope that you know
anything that you know uh when it comes
to politics and when it comes to uh
Israel's relationships with the us we
hope that pressure comes from from these
countries from Israel's allies which we
look for you know uh for a change a a
political solution is uh definitely
needed meanwhile some 800,000 people
have left rougher over the last two
weeks and many of them have been
displaced before just briefly where are
they
going in every direction really it's
it's it's a race to the West as it
stands closer to the beach area which is
not made for a human life really uh
closer to hunas where you know there's
so much destruction and our teams have
reported ex you
know the increase in prices in things
like tents and water and rent so people
are are fleeing in that direction and
you know with with the intensification
of the ground operation things are
getting worse and worse all right Ahmed
saam from the Norwegian Refugee Council
joining us from Aman Ahmed thank you so
much